--- PCOS Treatment Plan (Extracted from WebMD) ---

Source URL: https://www.webmd.com/women/what-is-pcos#1-10

--- PCOS Treatment ---

There's no cure for PCOS. The medical treatment that your doctor recommends to manage your symptoms depends on whether you're trying to get pregnant. It's important to talk to your doctor about this because certain medications can harm a developing baby.

They might prescribe:

Hormonal birth control. If you aren’t planning to get pregnant, your doctor might prescribe hormonal birth control, such as the patch, pill, shot, or hormonal IUD. They might contain estrogen, progesterone, or both. They can get your periods on track, help with acne and extra body hair, and lower your risk of endometrial cancer.
Progestin therapy. This hormone can help normalize your menstrual cycle and reduce your odds of uterine cancer. It doesn't prevent pregnancy or reduce levels of androgens.
Insulin-sensitizing medications. Metformin, a drug used to treat type 2 diabetes, helps lower insulin and androgen levels. While it's not FDA-approved to treat PCOS, it can help with ovulation and period problems.
Androgen blockers. These drugs block the effects of the extra male hormones that cause issues such as unwanted hair growth and acne. But don't take them if you're pregnant or plan to get pregnant, because they can cause birth defects. While you're on them, you should use two different types of birth control.

Related:
Bizarre Birth Control Methods You Won’t Believe

Acne medications

If you have acne that bothers you, a dermatologist can prescribe creams and/or pills to treat and prevent breakouts.

Excessive hair growth

If you want to reduce facial or body hair, other options include:

Electrolysis or laser therapy: Electrolysis removes individual hairs with an electric current that destroys the root. Laser therapy destroys hair follicles. You'll need several sessions. While some hair may come back, it should be finer and less noticeable.

Depilatories: These over-the-counter creams, gels, and lotions break down the protein structure of hair so it falls out of the skin. Follow the directions on the package.

