--- Progeria Treatment Plan (Extracted from Mayo Clinic) ---

There's no cure for progeria. But regular monitoring for heart and blood vessel disease may help with managing your child's condition.

During medical visits, your child's weight and height are measured and put on a chart that shows average measurements of children who are your child's age. Routine evaluations often include electrocardiograms and echocardiograms to check the heart, imaging tests, such as X-ray and MRI, and dental, vision and hearing exams.

Certain therapies may ease or delay some of the symptoms of progeria. Treatments depend on your child's condition and symptoms. These may include:


Lonafarnib (Zokinvy).
This oral medicine helps prevent the buildup of faulty progerin and progerin-like proteins in cells. Preventing this buildup in cells can slow the progression of symptoms that occur in progeria, which can help some children live longer. The medicine is approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration for children 1 year and older.
Low-dose aspirin.
A daily dose may help prevent heart attacks and strokes.
Other medicines.
Depending on your child's condition, the health care provider may prescribe other medicines to treat complications. These may include dietary therapy, possibly with statins to help blood vessels and heart function. Also, blood thinners to help prevent blood clots. Medicines to treat headaches and other symptoms may be needed.
Physical and occupational therapy.
Physical therapy can help with joint stiffness and hip problems to help your child remain active. Occupational therapy can help your child learn ways to manage daily activities, such as dressing, brushing teeth and eating.
Nutrition.
A balanced diet that includes healthy, high-calorie foods can help maintain adequate nutrition. Sometimes nutrition supplements are needed to provide extra calories.
Hearing aids.
Although low-frequency hearing loss does not usually affect daily activities, sometimes listening devices or hearing aids are needed.
Eye and vision care.
Not being able to close eyelids completely can cause dry eyes and damage to the surface of the eye. Moisturizing eye products and regular vision care can help.
Dental care.
Dental problems are common in progeria. Regular visits with a pediatric dentist experienced with progeria can treat problems early.



## Future treatment


Current research seeks to understand progeria and identify new treatment options. Some areas of research include:


Studying genes and the course of the condition to understand how it progresses. This may help identify new treatments.
Studying ways to prevent heart and blood vessel disease.
Testing more medicines for treatment of progeria.
